HARI SREENIVASAN: We hear a lot
about how divided our country
is along many lines: race,
class and especially
now our politics.
But in our next Race Matters
conversation, "NewsHour"
special correspondent Charlayne
Hunter-Gault talks with
the co-authors of "The
Third Reconstruction:
How a Moral Movement
Is Overcoming the Politics
of Division and Fear" about
their success in bridging those
divides.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
In recent weeks, Reverend
William Barber stepped
down from heading the
NAACP in North Carolina to focus
on what he calls a national
moral revival, updating the
Poor People's Campaign started
by the Reverend Martin Luther
King Jr. that linked the civil
rights struggle for
African-Americans to demands for
equality for all poor people.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II, Co-Author,
"The Third Reconstruction:
How a Moral Movement Is
Overcoming the Politics
of Division and Fear": There was
this thing, if you will, called
the white Southern strategy.
And the goal of it was
undermine black and
white fusion coalitions.
What we're going to do is,
we're going to figure out a way
to talk that makes poor whites
think that they're losing
because black people and
brown people are gaining.
And what you do in that is, you
make poor whites, who should
be allies with poor blacks,
think that their problem,
their poverty is being caused
because black and brown people
are acquiring something or
taking something from them.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So,
what led you to try and bridge
that gap, and what made you
want to do that?
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: Dr. King
said -- back in the '60s, he
said, the only transformative
force that could really, fully
transform America would be for
poor whites and blacks and brown
people and working
people to come together.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Jonathan
Wilson-Hartgrove conversion
began when he first met Reverend
Barber.
Before that, he had been a young
conservative who had worked
both for the Moral Majority,
a political group associated
with the Christian right and the
Republican Party, and also for
conservative South Carolina
Senator Strom Thurmond.
What was your own attitude
about poor black people and
black people in general?
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE,
Co-Author, "The Third
Reconstruction: How
a Moral Movement
Is Overcoming the Politics of
Division and Fear": So, I was
raised in the Southern Baptist
Church in a sundown town.
Until 1983, there was a sign
at the edge of our town that
told black people they weren't
welcome there after
the sun went down.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: I have
read that you called yourself
a racist in those days.
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE: Sure.
I didn't know I was a racist,
but Reverend Barber helped me
see that I was racist, and,
more importantly, that my
racism was getting in the way
of loving Jesus, which is what
I really wanted to do.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Wilson-Hartgrove first
heard Reverend Barber
some 20 years ago at
a meeting called by the
North Carolina governor.
Reverend Barber delivered
a motivational speech to a
gathering of young people.
Wilson-Hartgrove was moved
by what Barber said and began
to understand how racism had
been used as a tool to divide.
Growing up poor,
Wilson-Hartgrove had
never before realized
what he had in common with
poor black people.
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE: We
were taught to believe that
there were people who were
poor because they
chose to be poor.
And that narrative kept us
from seeing the way that our
religion was being used to pit
us against other people.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Reverend
Barber has even taken his
message into Appalachia, and
up to Mitchell County,
North Carolina.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: Mitchell
County, North Carolina is a
place where, in 1920, all the
black people were run out of
town over the accusation of a
black man raping a white woman.
It's 97 percent white,
77 percent Republican.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Wary,
but undeterred, Reverend Barber
seized on the invitation of
this rural white church.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: I
went in and talked to
them for about an hour.
And I said, listen, this
legislature just cut,
denied Medicaid expansion.
There are 1,000 people in this
county that would get health
care, and they can't be black,
because there are no
black people are up here.
They cut funding for
public education.
You are losing teachers here.
And they have to be white.
Now, you voted for some of the
people because of what they
told you they stood on prayer
in school and abortion and
homosexuality, but let's look
at what they are doing, and
how it is hurting you.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So,
basically, what you did was to
talk to them about the things
that they had in common.
And it registered.
It permeated their
consciousness.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: You talk to
people honestly, you talk to
them about what it means to be
a human being, and you
show them the hypocrisy.
You know, you show them how
they're being fooled, if you
will, that people are saying,
I care about your best
interests, but those
people are actually
putting in place policies
that are hurting everybody.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What
strategy did you use to reach
people who had been brought
up like Jonathan?
What did you do to convince
them that this wasn't right?
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: I know
that many of my white
evangelical friends or
many African-Americans
who were bought into
this kind of a public
engagement-type faith
really have been introduced
to -- and I say this sorrowfully
-- a form of heresy and a form
of theological malpractice.
To try to suggest that Jesus
was just about a little prayer,
a little preaching and a
little worship and a little
charity -- the very Jesus that
white evangelicals claim to
lift up was a brown-skinned
Palestinian Jew whose
first sermon was
challenging the economic
exploitation of the empire.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Reverend
Barber and Wilson-Hartgrove
have been working together
in a multiracial movement known
as Moral Monday, weekly protests
held on the grounds of the
North Carolina state capitol
in Raleigh aimed at helping
citizens understand their common
interest around such issues
as health care, voting rights
and immigration, also how they
are affected by these and
other governmental policies,
regardless of race or class.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: When we went
into the first Moral Monday
in a diverse role as clergy,
investment, first,
some people laughed.
They said we were a nuisance.
But then they started
seeing more people come,
and they looked diverse.
They said, that's my
teacher getting arrested,
that's my doctor, that's
a black man and white
man walking together.
That's a Jew and a
rabbi and a Christian.
What's going on?
So, people began to think --
even though they didn't get
arrested, they would come.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
The Moral Monday movement
is the foundation for
Reverend Barber's latest
project that he intends
to take to some 25 states.
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE:
What can be learned
from our experience is
that white people need
to talk about race honestly.
We need to say, of
course we're racist.
This is a country that's
built on white supremacy.
You know, it's not like
it's a personal failing.
I inherited this.
Racism is about structures
that pass on what
we inherited, right?
Inequalities that we
inherited are written
into these structures.
And when we help white people
think about that, I think
we're making it possible to
form alliances that we
haven't been able to form.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: And black
people can't be afraid of that.
We have to look back in history.
When black and white people
came together right after the
Civil War, we fundamentally
changed this country.
When black and white and brown
people and Jews and Christians
came together in the civil
rights movement, it
was transformative.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Are you
at all optimistic that the kinds
of things that you're doing
are going to make a
difference in ending racism?
JONATHAN WILSON-HARTGROVE: I
think racism is the fundamental
challenge to the American
project.
This is a country that was
built on the original sin of
race-based chattel slavery.
It is how the, you know,
concentrated capital
in this country from
the very beginning has
maintained power.
But I don't think that the
future of America is possible
without dealing with it.
REV.
WILLIAM BARBER II: I'm hopeful.
Optimism is a different thing.
I believe we have to be the
kind of what I call moral
dissenters, moral defibrillators
who shock the nation.
But we also are seeing
something in the wind.
You have white people marching
with Black Lives Matter.
I had a friend of mine who's a
Sikh, and she put it like this.
Quickly, she said, a tomb
is dark and a womb is dark,
but there's a difference.
A tomb is death, a
womb is possibility.
It's dark now.
But if we push and push together
and come together, I think
this is a birthing moment.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Charlayne Hunter-Gault.